First version of documentation (#4)
exasol/azure-data-factory-functions: doc/user_guide.md

# User guide

The guide will go over the deployment of the Exasol Azure helper Functions briefly and then focus on using them in azure data factory itself.

## Requirements

An azure subscription with sufficient privileges to create resource groups, storage accounts, function apps and an azure data factory.

## Deployment

A full section on all deployment options available for Azure Functions can be found in the azure function docs under the how-to guides: [Zip push deployment for Azure Functions | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/deployment-zip-push)

In this guide I'll elaborate on 1 of the easiest user friendly ways to set up azure functions. 

The microsoft documentation on deploying azure functions is way more exhaustive so if this doesn't cover your needs you might find a better option there.

Let's get started:

### Zip Deployment using the Azure Portal and Azure CLI:

> Setting everything up in the azure portal:

Reviewer: I would suggest keeping it unified and use title case for Azure services name across the documentation

Navigate to the azure portal and log in if you haven't done so yet: [Microsoft Azure](https://portal.azure.com/#home)

On the dashboard, click on 'Create a resource'.

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-02-42-image.png)

Search for 'function', then pick 'Function App'.

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-04-40-image.png)

Click 'Create'.

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-05-43-image.png)

Now we need to do some setup:

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-06-27-image.png)

Create a new resource group (or use an existing one if you want). Take note of the name.

Pick a (unique) function app name.

Pick '.NET' as the runtime stack and pick '3.1' as the version.

Pick the region that fits you the most (this will probably the same region as where you host the Azure Data Factory as well).

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-08-55-image.png)

Next, press 'Hosting'. This will bring you to the next setup screen.

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-11-27-image.png)

Create a new storage account name (recommended) or use an existing one. 

Take note of the name.

> As operating system pick 'Windows', ()this is because we use a .dll from the Exasol ADO .NET data provider that's not crossplatform.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As operating system pick 'Windows' (this is because we use a .dll from the Exasol ADO .NET data provider that's not cross-platform).
```

> Press 'Review + Create' and then press ''Create'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Press 'Review + Create' and then press 'Create'.
```

You'll get a notification saying 'Deployment is underway'. This might take a minute.

Once the deployment is complete you'll get a notification and you can navigate to the resource. Do so.

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-14-28-image.png)

We've now succesfully created our azure functions app. You can already take a look around. 

As you see there are no functions yet so our next step will be uploading these functions.

For this we'll use the Azure CLI tools.

#### Install the Azure CLI (get it here):

[Install the Azure CLI for Windows | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli-windows?tabs=azure-cli)

> #### Get the zipped release of the Exasol azure helper functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Get the Zipped Release of the Exasol Azure Helper Functions
```

Author: ok

Get the packaged version of the exasol azure data factory functions here:

Release.zip (TODO: add url)

#### Deploy the zipped functions using the azure CLI

Using the provided .zip in the release you can easily deploy the azure functions.

Download the .zip

Use azure cli:

Login:

Open a command line window ("cmd") or powershell or a terminal of your choice

Type:

> az login

Reviewer: You can use code blocks like this:
```
az login
```

Author: done

Your preferred browser will open and you will be able to login.

Now navigate to the folder where you downloaded the packaged zip file and run the following command:

> az webapp deployment source config-zip -g $resourceGroupName -n $functionName --src $sourceZipPath

Reviewer: I think this would look better with a code block. The same suggestion for all other commands

Author: done

In our case this would be

az webapp deployment source config-zip -g adf-ug-rg -n exaadfug --src adffunctions.zip .

Running this command might take a while.

If everything is succesfull you'll get a JSON response describing the resource and that its ProvisioningState "succeeded".

![](./img/2021-08-04-15-22-00-image.png)

If you navigate back to your Function App and click on the Functions tab you will see that the helper functions are now present:

<img src="file:///C:/adftut/doc/img/2021-08-04-15-28-19-image.png" title="" alt="" width="747">

### Alternate approach : Deploying to Azure using Visual Studio or Visual Code ''Publish''

> These methods may be a bit more involved and require you to have visual studio or visual studio code installed but might be more practical if you want to alter or add some of the behaviour of these functions yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods may be a bit more involved and require you to have a visual studio or visual studio code installed but might be more practical if you want to alter or add some of the behavior of these functions yourself.
```

Author: (both are correct behavior and behaviour)

> You'll find guides for visual studio here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-create-your-first-function-visual-studio and for visual studio code here: [Create a C# function using Visual Studio Code - Azure Functions | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/create-first-function-vs-code-csharp) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll find guides for a visual studio here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-create-your-first-function-visual-studio and for visual studio code here: [Create a C# function using Visual Studio Code - Azure Functions | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/create-first-function-vs-code-csharp) 
```

> 

Reviewer: Please remove extra empty lines

## Using the functions in Azure Data factory.

> If you haven't done so yet, create a ''Data Factory' in azure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't done so yet, create a 'Data Factory' in azure.
```

> Open ''Azure Data Factory Studio'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open 'Azure Data Factory Studio'.
```

### Setting up a linked service to your function app

Let's set up a linked service to our function app so we can use these functions in our pipelines.

> Click on the ''manage' 'tab icon (wrench in a toolbox icon) to the left.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on the 'manage' tab icon (wrench in a toolbox icon) to the left.
```

> Under 'Connections' Select 'Linked services', then Click ''New'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under 'Connections' Select 'Linked services', then Click 'New'.
```

Reviewer: Please check other places with this extra `

![](./img/2021-08-04-16-19-59-image.png)

Click the Compute tab at the top, select 'Azure Function'.

![](./img/2021-08-04-16-20-15-image.png)

We have some configuration to do:

Pick a  good name,

as integration runtime, select the 'AutoResolveIntegrationRuntime',

> select your azure subscription and your azure function app url (both are dropdowns).

Reviewer: Maybe merge this to one sentence on one line?

The last thing you got to fill in is the 'Function key'.

 This key is used to prevent others from accessing your azure functions and to authenticate your requests from within azure data factory.

You can find this key (or create an additional one) in your Function App under Settings:

![](./img/2021-08-04-16-25-39-image.png)

Open a new tab in your browser and navigate to your Function App you set up in the earlier steps.

In your function app, select the 'App keys' tab. 

Under 'Host keys' you'll see the default key. We'll use this key, if you wish you could also create an additional key and use that one.

Click the eye icon and then the copy icon to copy the key to your clipboard. Paste this key into the Function key field of the new linked service we're creating.

![](./img/2021-08-04-16-21-50-image.png)

Click ''Create' to create the linked service.

> Click 'Publish all' at the top

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click 'Publish all' at the top.
```

This concludes the setup phase. We're now ready to start using these functions in our pipelines.

Open the 'Author' tab.

### Using the exasol azure functions in your pipelines

All 3 functions are currently implemented using POST methods where you send a JSON body containing the parameters.

#### Query method

> Let's start with using the Query method:

Reviewer: I would avoid colon here (and in other places). A lowercase letter is usually used after colon, so it should be the same sentence

![](./img/2021-08-05-14-20-42-image.png)

After clicking 'Add dynamic content' a tab will open to the right. All that's left to do now is paste in the request body:

```
{
"connectionstring":"Server=demodatabase.exasol.com;Port=8563;UID=yourusername;PWD=yourpassword",
"query":"SELECT COMPANY FROM CHICAGO_TAXI.COMPANIES"
}
```

In this case it's 2 parameters, both of them are required. 

The `connectionstring` parameter is the connection string of the exasol database.

The `query `parameter is whatever query you want to run.

Note: Currently only SELECT statements are supported.

When you validate the pipeline and look at the output you will see  query data under 'Results' in the returned JSON.

You can then extract this data and further work with it in a new activity using the output.

##### Input values

You can enter the values in the POST request body as plaintext, which is the simplest, but you could also use pipeline parameters,  global parameters, variables or data from previous activities.

> Personally I prefer storing my connection strings as secrets in azure key vault and then fetching these using web activities in my pipeline as an earlier step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend storing my connection strings as secrets in the Azure Key Vault and then fetching them using web activities in the pipeline as an earlier step.
```

There's a great article on how to set this up here:

[Use Azure Key Vault secrets in pipeline activities - Azure Data Factory | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-factory/how-to-use-azure-key-vault-secrets-pipeline-activities)

In this case the POST body would then look somewhat like this:

```
{
"connectionstring":"@{string(activity('Get Exasol Azure 1 Connection String Secret').output.value)}",
"query":"SELECT COMPANY FROM CHICAGO_TAXI.COMPANIES"
}
```

> ### 

Reviewer: To remove?

### Azure Blob Storage Csv bulk import (durable)

> This function is built for bulk import of many, large csv files from azure blob storage into the exasol database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is built for bulk import of many, large CSV files from Azure Blob Storage into the Exasol database.
```

> The setup for this function is a little bit more involved than the query one since this is a durable function.

Reviewer: Maybe add a small explanation of what is a durable function?
